Add RFC for latch support. (#109)
prjunnamed/prjunnamed: rfcs/0000-latch.md

- Feature Name: `latch`
- Start Date: 2026-03-01
- RFC PR: [prjunnamed/prjunnamed#0000](https://github.com/prjunnamed/prjunnamed/pull/0000)

# Latch support
[summary]: #summary

An "asynchronous load" capability is added to the flip-flop cell, allowing it to represent more types of register primitives, including latches.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> The usual modern recommendation for synchronous logic design is to solely use D flip-flop cells with a single constant-value synchronous or asynchronous reset, organized into well-defined domains.  The current `dff` cell type perfectly matches this paradigm.  However, there is also a need to represent more exotic cell types such as latches, flip-flops with more than one reset input, or flip-flops with non-constant reset input.

Reviewer: Maybe differentiate trigger and value: "with more than one reset trigger inputs, or with non-constant reset value inputs" or something similar

A simple latch would be represented as such:

```verilog
reg [3:0] q;
always @(*)
    if (en)
        q <= d;
```

```
%0:4 = <d>
%1:1 = <en>
%2:4 = dff load=%1,%0:4
```

`load=` can be combined with all other capabilities of the `dff` cell.  It can be used to describe a flip-flop with a dynamically variable asynchronous reset value:

```verilog
input [3:0] arval;
// NOTE: this Verilog does *NOT* correctly reflect the semantics of the flip-flop we want; such is the pain of describing hardware in a language woefully unsuited for it, including mandating a synthesis-simulation mismatch in the spec.
always @(posedge arst, posedge clk)
    if (arst)
        q <= arval;
    else
        q <= d;
```

```
%0:4 = <d>
%1:1 = <clk>
%2:4 = <arval>
%3:1 = <arst>
%4:4 = dff %0:4 clk=%1:1 load=%3,%2:4
```

The asynchronous load takes precedence over any synchronous operations, but the asynchronous reset takes precedence over asynchronous load.  A latch with a reset can be described as such:

```verilog
always @(*)
    if (rst)
        q <= 0;
    else if (en)
        q <= d;
```

```
%0:4 = <d>
%1:1 = rst
%2:1 = en
%3:4 = dff load=%2,%0:4 clr=%1,0000
```

> As a special case, this can be used to describe the occasionally seen flip-flop with both asynchronous set and reset inputs:

Reviewer: Forcing to define the S&R behavior of the input domain or models of technology cells can be restrictive depending on the intended range of possible use cases. Liberty files declare if S&R behavior is undefined or if S or R takes priority. Verilog forces users to specify one or the other, Yosys proc treats S&R as undefined and adds logic to ensure that is the case. My resolution in Yosys is to have undef S&R behavior and add a `$priority` cell with further potential use cases. This should avoid emitting excessive logic for when the priorioty in source and PDK cell matches, and even to support "don't care S&R" features in future HDLs.

https://github.com/YosysHQ/yosys/issues/5194

> The `siliconblue` target only supports `dff` cells that don't use the `load` input (ie. have the `load` enable tied to a constant 0).

> The `virtex2` target only supports `dff` cells that meet at least one of the following conditions:
>
> 1. `clk` input is tied to a constant (a latch with reset)
> 2. `load` enable is tied to constant 0 (a flip-flop, possibly with async reset)
> 3. `load` data is tied to an all-1 constant, while `clr` value is an all-0 constant (a flip-flop with async reset and async set)

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

The full specification of a flip-flop cell becomes:

```rust
    // defaults to X
    data: Value,
    // defaults to 0
    clock: ControlNet,
    // defaults to 0
    clear: ControlNet,
    // defaults to 0
    load: ControlNet,
    // defaults to X
    load_data: Value,
    // defaults to 0
    reset: ControlNet,
    // defaults to 1
    enable: ControlNet,

>     reset_over_enable: bool,

Reviewer: In Yosys, the proposed `$priority` cell is a structural rather than parametric alternative. It can be used to set vs reset priority, reset vs enable priority, but maybe even to turn an if/elif/else `$mux` chain into a single `$pmux` with one-or-none-hot guaranteed on the select signal. But I guess you're not intending to have a `$pmux`-cell.
https://github.com/YosysHQ/yosys/pull/5613

    } else if self.clock && !prev(self.clock) {
        if self.reset_over_enable && self.reset {
            self.reset_value
        } else if !self.enable {
            prev(self.q)
        } else if self.reset {
            self.reset_value
        } else {
            self.data
        }
    }
}
```

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Latches are often maligned, as Verilog makes it easy to accidentally introduce them to a design, breaking it in interesting ways.  However, we consider this to be a defect in Verilog, and mitigating it should be done by linting in the frontend (ensuring any use of latches is intentional), not by entirely erasing the concept of latches from existence.

Not all targets can meaningfully support latches (`siliconblue` being the obvious example).  Furthermore, the proposed addition makes it possible to describe even more complex flip-flop types that cannot be realized even on some targets that do support latches.  As such, we need a concept of a generic cell with possibly complex target-dependent validity rules.  However, this is not a unique concept: the same problems are involved in lowering memory cells (with much more complex rules).

> All code operaitng on `dff` cells must remember to look at the new `load` input and skip processing if it cannot hanle such a cell.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All code operating on `dff` cells must remember to look at the new `load` input and skip processing if it cannot handle such a cell.
```

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

First, we must note there are a myriad variants of register types that we may or may not decide to represent.  As a point of reference, let's consider the following types:

1. A simple latch (`$dlatch` in yosys taxonomy)
2. A latch with async reset (`$adlatch`)
3. A latch with async reset and async set (`$dlatchsr`)
4. A latch with async reset and async set, but no data input (`$sr`)
5. A flip-flop with asynchronous load (`$aldff`)
6. A flip-flop with asynchronous load and asynchronous reset (no corresponding yosys cell)
7. A flip-flop with async reset and async set (`$dffsr`)
8. A flip-flop with asynchronous load, asynchronous reset, and asynchronous set (no corresponding yosys cell)

While the core premise of this RFC is that we want to support latches, it is not obvious just how many variants of them should be included in the IR.

The question of hardware support must be considered. The following register types can be natively realized on interesting targets:

> 1. `siliconblue`: no latches at all; only simple D flip-flop with synchronous or asynchronous reeset

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `siliconblue`: no latches at all; only simple D flip-flop with synchronous or asynchronous reset
```
